Let's press on with our next topic,
which is how we take these
little functions and
turn them into big complex programs.
As we said before, functional programming
is programming with pure functions and
everything in a functional
program is function.
So you could say it's
functions all the way down.
A program in the functional
programming mindset becomes
a function that takes in some kind of
input and returns some kind of output.
That function itself
may be made up of a lot
more simple functions that
when we put them all together,
give us a complex operation worthy
of a complete computer program.
So the idea with functional programming
is that we have inputs coming in,
we have outputs coming out.
And those outputs can also
become new inputs for
the next function whose outputs can
become new inputs for another function.
Remember when we looked at that
filter MapReduce sandwich earlier,
we had the outputs of filter
going into the input of map and
the output of map going into the input
of reduce and so on and so forth.
So what ends up happening when you
write functional programs is that you
end up writing programs
where you think about.
How the data is gonna flow
through your different functions.
So you end up with something like this,
where if I wanna get from a,
a green circle to b a purple triangle,
I might think, okay,
I could have a function where I'm going to
transform green circles into Triangles.
And then I might have a function where
I'm going to transform the color and
return the same shape, but purple.
And so
we're going to be flowing data through.
So we think,
what's the output that I want?
What's the input that I'm getting?
And how can I flow the data
through a series of
functions to get the result that I want?
And once I figure that out,
I can actually use something called
function composition where we
sorta putting together functions,
composing them together to take
simple functions and create complex
programs that nevertheless themselves
are input in output out functions.
So what this might look like is if I had
that f of x function which is turning
circles into triangles and then I have a g
of x function which is turning green into
purple what I actually wanna be doing
is calling them both on the same input.
So first I'm gonna call f of x, and
then whatever the output of that is,
I'm gonna call g on that.
And what I get then is kind of I can make
a single function that does all of that.
So now I can treat that outer
function as just a black box.
And once I've got it composed the right
way, I don't need to worry about all of
the miniscule little operations
that are happening inside of it.
I can treat it as a single kind of
blackbox where I only care about the input
coming in and
I only care about the output coming out.
So for example, I have a little ender
function here which is similar to
the curried function we saw before,
where it takes in a single argument.
Returns another function that
takes in a single argument, and
then smashes their values together.
So I can make an ender
function that I'll call
adore which is gonna say
that something rocks.
And then I might make an announce function
that's going to say y'all, like hey y'all.
And then I might make an exclaim function
which is going to end things with
exclamation point so
that I'm really excited about it.
Now I probably don't think each of
these are super useful on their own but
I could put them all together into
a function that I might call hypeup.
Where I take in some thing,
some value x, string in this case.
And then what I'm going to do is say
that I adore it, say that it rocks.
Announced that say hey y'all and
then exclaim, that so
add an exclamation point so that you
know that I'm really hyped up about it.
So if now if i hypeUp ("JS"),
I can say JS rock y'all whoo.
And if I hypeup FP I'll say FP
rocks y'all really excited.
And hopefully by now and this long brain
busting day we're all feeling super hyped
about this functional programming stuff.
The idea here is that
now I have a program,
hypeUp is now a program made
up of these simple functions.
And maybe I want to, let's say,
replace y'all with
something like everyone or
folks, I can make a new function,
swap that out and
still reuse my adore and
my explain functions and
make a new hype up folks function for
example.
So the idea here is that by
breaking down earlier we saw
how by breaking down
complex argument functions,
multi argument functions into single
ones we get smaller little functions.
What we're thinking about now is how do we
take those smaller little functions and
build them back up into
more complex programs.